
# 2.1 Definition of linearly separable sets

In this section, we consider a special class of $k$ linearly separable
sets for $k\ge 2$. Let us first introduce the following definition for
binary classification.

For $k=2$, there is a very simple geometric interpretation of two
linearly separable sets.

```{admonition} Definition 
:class: tip
:name: lem2class
The two sets $A_1$, $A_2\subset \mathbb{R}^d$ are linearly separable if there exists a
hyperplane

such that $wx+b>0$ if $x \in A_1$ and $wx+b<0$ if
$x \in A_2$

$$
  H_{0}=\{x:wx+b=0\} 
$$ (2classH)

$$
  w_{t+1} = (1 + r_{t+1}) s(w_t) + y_{t+1}
$$ (my_other_label)
```
$$
  H_{0}=\{x:wx+b=0\} 
$$ (2classH)

$$
  w_{t+1} = (1 + r_{t+1}) s(w_t) + y_{t+1}
$$ (my_other_label)

a\ref{2classH}
```{figure} ../figures/LinearS1.png
:height: 150px
:name: twoclassification
One linearly separable set
```

{ref}`twoclassification`
- Alink to eq: {eq}`2classH`
![Two non-linearly separable
sets](NLinearS1.png "fig:"){#twoclassification width="1.5in"} ![Two
non-linearly separable sets](NLinearS2.png "fig:"){#twoclassification
width="1.5in"}

::: lemma
[\[lem:2class\]]{#lem:2class label="lem:2class"} The two sets $A_1$,
$A_2\subset \mathbb{R}^d$ are linearly separable if there exists
$$\label{Wb}
W=
\begin{pmatrix}
  w_1\\
w_2
\end{pmatrix}
\in \mathbb{R}^{2\times d}, 
b=
\begin{pmatrix}
  b_1\\
b_2
\end{pmatrix}
\in \mathbb{R}^{2\times d},$$ such that, $$\label{eq:3}
 w_1x+b_1 > w_2x+b_2,\ \forall x\in A_1,$$ and $$\label{eq:3}
 w_1x+b_1 < w_2x+b_2,\ \forall x\in A_2.$$
:::

::: proof
*Proof.* Here, we can just take $w = w_1 - w_2$ and $b = b_1 - b_2$,
then we can check that the hyperplane $wx + b$ satisfies the definition
as presented before. ◻
:::

Now let us consider multi-class classification. To begin with the
definition, let us assume that the data space is divided into $k$
classes represented by $k$ disjoint sets
$A_1,A_2,\cdots,A_k\subset \mathbb{R}^d$, which means
$$A = A_1\cup A_2\cup \cdots \cup A_k, ~A_i\cap A_j = \emptyset, \forall i \neq j.$$

::: definition
A collection of subsets $A_1,...,A_k\subset \mathbb{R}^d$ are linearly
separable if there exist $$\label{Wb}
W=
\begin{pmatrix}
  w_1\\
\vdots\\
w_k
\end{pmatrix}
\in \mathbb{R}^{k\times d}, 
b=
\begin{pmatrix}
  b_1\\
\vdots\\
b_k
\end{pmatrix}
\in \mathbb{R}^{k\times d},$$ such that, for each $1\le i\le k$ and
$j \neq i$ $$\label{eq:3}
 w_ix+b_i > w_jx+b_j,\ \forall x\in A_i.$$ namely, each pairs of $A_i$
and $A_j$ are linearly separable by the plane $$\label{Hij}
H_{ij}=\{(w_i-w_j)\cdot x+(b_i-b_j) = 0\}, \quad \forall j\neq i.$$
:::

The geometric interpretation for linearly separable sets is less obvious
when $k>2$.

::: lemma
[\[Interplation\]]{#Interplation label="Interplation"} Assume that
$A_1,...,A_k$ are linearly separable and $W\in
\mathbb{R}^{k\times d}$ and $b\in\mathbb{R}^k$ satisfy
[\[Wb\]](#Wb){reference-type="eqref" reference="Wb"}. Define
$$\label{Gammai}
\Gamma_i(W,b) = \{x\in\mathbb R^d: (Wx+b)_i > (Wx+b)_j,\ \forall j \neq i\}$$
Then for each $i$, $$\label{AiGamma}
A_i \subset \Gamma_i(W,b)$$
:::

We note that each $\Gamma_i(W,b)$ is a polygon whose boundary consists
of hyperplanes given by [\[Hij\]](#Hij){reference-type="eqref"
reference="Hij"}.

![Linearly separable sets in 2-d space (k =
3)](./figures/3-class.PNG){#twoclassification width="1.5in"}

We next introduce two more definitions of linearly separable sets that
have more clear geometric interpretation.

::: definition
A collection of subsets $A_1,...,A_k\subset \mathbb{R}^d$ is all-vs-one
linearly separable if for each $i = 1,...,k$, $A_i$ and
$\displaystyle \cup_{j\neq i} A_j$ are linearly separable.
:::

![All-vs-One linearly separable sets (k =
3)](./figures/MulLClassfication.PNG){#twoclassification width="1.5in"}

::: definition
A collection of subsets $A_1,...,A_k\subset \mathbb{R}^d$ is pairwise
linearly separable if for each pair of indices $1\leq i <
  j\leq k$, $A_i$ and $A_j$ are linearly separable.
:::

![Pairwise linearly separable sets in 2-d space (k =
3)](./figures/pairwise_linearly_separable.png){#pairwise_separable_example
width="1.5in"}

We begin by comparing our notion of linearly separable to the two other
previously introduced geometric definitions of all-vs-one linearly
separable and pairwise lineaerly separable. Obviously, in the case of
two classes, they are all equivalent, however, with more than two
classes this is no longer the case. We do have the following
implications, though.

::: lemma
If $A_1,...,A_k\subset \mathbb{R}^d$ are all-vs-one linearly separable,
then they are linearly separable as well.
:::

::: proof
*Proof.* Assume that $A_1,...,A_k$ are all-vs-one linearly separable.
For each $i$, let $w_i$, $b_i$ be such that $w_ix + b_i$ separates $A_i$
from $\cup_{j\neq i} A_j$, i.e. $w_ix + b_i > 0$ for $x\in A_i$ and
$w_ix + b_i < 0$ for $x \in \cup_{j\neq i} A_j$.

Set $W = (w_1^T,w_2^T,\cdots,w_k^T)^T$, $b = (b_1,b_2,\cdots,b_k)^T$ and
observe that if $x\in A_i$, then $(Wx + b)_i > 0$ while $(Wx + b)_j < 0$
for all $j\neq i$. ◻
:::

::: lemma
If $A_1,...,A_k\subset \mathbb{R}^n$ are linearly separable, then they
are pairwise linearly separable as well.
:::

::: proof
*Proof.* If $A_1,...,A_k\subset \mathbb{R}^d$ are linearly separable,
suppose that $W = (w_1^T,w_2^T,\cdots,w_k^T)^T$, $b =
  (b_1,b_2,\cdots,b_k)^T$. So we have $$\begin{cases} 
    w_i x+ b_i > w_j x + b_j & x\in A_i \\
    w_i x+ b_i < w_j x + b_j& x\in A_j \\
    \end{cases}$$ Take $w_{i,j} = w_i - w_j, b_{i,j} = b_i-b_j$, then we
have $$w_{i,j}x + b_{i,j}\begin{cases} 
    > 0 & x\in A_i \\
    < 0 & x\in A_j \\
    \end{cases}$$ So $A_1,...,A_k$ are pairwise linearly separable. ◻
:::

However, the converses of both of these statements are false, as the
following examples show.

::: example
Consider the sets $A_1, A_2, A_3\subset \mathbb{R}$ given by
$A_1 = [-4,-2]$, $A_2 = [-1,1]$, and $A_3 = [2,4]$. These sets are
clearly not one-vs-all linearly separable because $A_2$ cannot be
separated from both $A_1$ and $A_3$ by a single plane (in $\mathbb{R}$
this is just cutting the real line at a given number, and $A_2$ is in
the middle).

However, these sets are linearly separated by $W = [-2,0,2]^T$ and
$b = [-3,0,-3]^T$, for example.
:::

::: example
Consider the sets $A_1, A_2, A_3\subset \mathbb{R}^2$ shown in figure
[6](#pairwise_separable_example){reference-type="ref"
reference="pairwise_separable_example"}. Note that $A_i$ and $A_j$ are
separated by hyperplane $H_{i,j}$ (drawn in the figure) and so these
sets are pairwise linearly separable. We will show that they are not
linearly separable.

Assume to the contrary that $W\in \mathbb{R}^{3\times 2}$ and
$b\in \mathbb{R}^2$ separate $A_1$, $A_2$, and $A_3$. Then
$(w_i - w_j)x + (b_i - b_j)$ must be a plane which separates $A_i$ and
$A_j$. Now consider a point $z$ bounded by $A_1$, $A_2$ and $A_3$ in
figure [6](#pairwise_separable_example){reference-type="ref"
reference="pairwise_separable_example"}. We see from the figure that
given any plane separating $A_1$ from $A_2$, $z$ must be on the same
side as $A_2$, given any plane separating $A_2$ from $A_3$, $z$ must be
on the same side as $A_3$, and given any plane separating $A_3$ from
$A_1$, $z$ must be on the same side as $A_1$.

This means that $(w_2 - w_1)z + (b_2 - b_1) > 0$,
$(w_3 - w_2)z + (b_3 - b_2) > 0$, and $(w_1 - w_3)z + (b_1 - b_3) > 0$.
Adding these together, we obtain $0 > 0$, a contradiction.

The essence behind this example is that although the sets $A_1$, $A_2$,
and $A_3$ are pairwise linearly separable, no possible pairwise
separation allows us to consistently classify arbitrary new points.
However, a linear separation would give us a consistent scheme for
classifying new points.
:::

So the notion of linear separability is sandwiched in between the more
intuitive notions of all-vs-one and pairwise separability. It turns out
that linear separability is the notion which is most useful for the
$k$-class classification problem and so we focus on this notion of
separability from now on.
